>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JANUARY 16: THE
U.N. SAYS IRAN HAS COMPLIED WITH
LAST YEAR'S NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
DEAL AS THAT NATION FREES
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER JASON
REZAIAN AND FOUR OTHER
AMERICANS; HOW ONE NEW YORK CITY
PROSECUTOR IS TAKING ACTION TO
REDUCE THE NUMBER OF OUTSTANDING
ARREST WARRANTS FOR LOW-LEVEL
CRIMES; AND WHAT AMERICAN
TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES LIKE GOOGLE
ARE DOING TO MAKE THEIR
WORKFORCES MORE DIVERSE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TODAY IS "IMPLEMENTATION DAY"
FOR IRAN'S NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
DEAL WITH THE UNITED STATES AND
OTHER WORLD POWERS.
DIPLOMATS MEETING IN VIENNA,
AUSTRIA, WORKED WELL INTO THE
NIGHT TO CERTIFY THAT IRAN HAS
MET THE TERMS OF LAST YEAR'S
LANDMARK DEAL TO SHUT DOWN ITS
PLUTONIUM REACTOR AND SHIP OUT
ITS STOCKPILE OF ENRICHED
URANIUM.
TONIGHT, THE INTERNATIONAL
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY ANNOUNCED
IRAN HAS CARRIED OUT ALL
REQUIRED MEASURES.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
LED LAST-MINUTE TALKS WITH
IRANIAN FOREIGN MINISTER JAVAD
ZARIF.
CERTIFICATION HAS PROMPTED THE
U.S. AND THE EUROPEAN UNION TO
LIFT LONG-STANDING ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS AGAINST IRAN, ALLOWING
THE COUNTRY TO GAIN ACCESS TO
$100 BILLION IN FROZEN ASSETS.
WITH SANCTIONS LIFTED, IRAN'S
GOVERNMENT SAYS WITHIN WEEKS IT
WILL BOOST OIL EXPORTS BY
500,000 BARRELS A DAY, AND IT
WILL IMMEDIATELY BUY 114
PASSENGER JETS FROM AIRBUS.
>> TODAY MARKS THE MOMENT THAT
THE IRAN NUCLEAR AGREEMENT
TRANSITIONS FROM AN AMBITIOUS
SET OF PROMISES ON PAPER TO
MEASURABLE ACTION IN PROGRESS.
>> Reporter: IN THE HOURS
LEADING UP TO CERTIFICATION,
IRAN FREED FIVE AMERICANS,
INCLUDING "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER JASON REZAIAN, WHO HAD
BEEN JAILED 18 MONTHS ON
ESPIONAGE CHARGES THAT HIS
NEWSPAPER CALLED "TRUMPED UP."
THE POST SAID IT "COULDN'T BE
HAPPIER" ABOUT HIS RELEASE.
REZAIAN AND THREE OTHER MEN
FREED-- INCLUDING A FORMER
MARINE AND A PASTOR-- ARE DUAL
U.S. AND IRANIAN CITIZENS.
IRAN ALSO RELEASED AN AMERICAN
COLLEGE STUDENT IN ITS CUSTODY.
IN EXCHANGE, THE U.S. GRANTED
CLEMENCY TO SEVEN IRANIANS
IMPRISONED OR CHARGED WITH
VIOLATING U.S. SANCTIONS, AND
DROPPED CHARGES AGAINST 14
OTHERS.
JOINING ME NOW FOR MORE ANALYSIS
ON TODAY'S DEVELOPMENTS IS EMAD
KIYAEI, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE AMERICAN IRANIAN COUNCIL,
A NONPROFIT, EDUCATIONAL
ORGANIZATION.
HE'S ALSO A RESEARCHER AT
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY.
HOW SIGNIFICANT IS WHAT
HAPPENED TODAY?
>> FIRST OF ALL, THANKS FOR
HAVING ME.
THIS IS A MAJOR BREAKTHROUGH.
TO FIRST OF ALL, HAVE THIS
RETURN OF IRANIAN AMERICANS WHO
WERE HELD IN JAIL IN IRAN, AND
OF COURSE, VICE VERSA IN THE
UNITED STATES.
OF COURSE, THE LATEST
ANNOUNCEMENTS OF THE I.A.E.A.,
USHERING IN IMPLEMENTATION DAY
FOR A NUCLEAR DEAL SO A VERY
GOOD DAY FOR THE IRANIANS AND
THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY AS A
WHOLE.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WERE TWO
TRACKS, AS SECRETARY KERRY
MENTIONED-- ONE THE PRISON SWAP
OR HUMANITARIAN GESTURE,
WHATEVER YOU WANT TO CALL IT.
HE SAID THESE THINGS MERGED
AND ACCELERATED BECAUSE THE
RELATIONS WERE GETTING STRONGER
OVER THE TWO AND A HALF YEARS
THEY WORKED TOGETHER.
>> I TOTALLY AGREE WITH HIS
ASSESSMENT.
ESPECIALLY BECAUSE IF YOU LOOK
AT THE TWO AND A HALF YEARS OF
NEGOTIATIONS, THEY WERE NOT
ONLY JUST INTENSE.
FOR THE FIRST TIME THE UNITED
STATES AND IRAN ENGAGED DIRECTLY
WITH ONE ANOTHER AFTER 36 YEARS
OF NON-RELATIONS.
SO, YOU HAVE A DIRECT CHANNEL
BETWEEN IRAN AND THE UNITED
STATES.
OF COURSE, THAT HELPS IN THIS
CASE, AND IN PREVIOUS CASES, WE
HAVE SEEN, IN THE CASE OF THE
MARINES, THE NAVY, THE TEN
SAILORS RELEASED WITHIN 24
HOURS, THIS ALSO CAME ABOUT
BECAUSE OF THE GOOD RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN JOHN KERRY AND HIS
COUNTERPART.
>> Sreenivasan: THEY COULD
HAVE BEEN USED AS PAWNS IN A
MUCH LONGER CHESS GAME.
>> EXACTLY.
THIS WOULDN'T HAVE HAPPENED A
YEAR AGO.
ESPECIALLY THE REVOLUTIONARY
GUARD ITSELF HAD TAKEN THE
SAILORS CAPTIVES.
>> Sreenivasan: DOES THIS
CHANGE THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY'S PERCEPTION OF IRAN
LIKE IRAN WANTS IT TO BE?
THEY WANT TO BE AT THIS STAGE,
THEY WANT TO BE ENGAGED IN TRADE
WITH THE WORLD.
>> THIS IS HOW ROHANI CAME INTO
POWER, ON THE BACK OF TRYING TO
REMOVE IRAN'S ISOLATION FROM
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY, RESOLVE
THE NUCLEAR ISSUE, AND, OF
COURSE, REVAMP THE IRANIAN
ECONOMY THAT HAS BEEN UNDER SO
MUCH PRESSURE BECAUSE OF
SANCTIONS.
SO, IRAN WANTS TO REJOIN THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.
AND I THINK THIS IMAGE OF IRAN,
THIS TREND IS GOING IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION TO BRING ABOUT A NEW
ASSESSMENT FROM THE AMERICAN
SIDE ON WHO THEY'RE DEALING WITH
IN THE IRANIAN LEADERSHIP.
AND I HOPE THAT THIS NUCLEAR
DEAL, THE PRISON EXCHANGE SWAP,
AND THE RELEASE OF THE SAILORS
IS JUST ONE STEP TOWARDS OPENING
UP THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
TWO COUNTRIES ON MORE PRESSING
ISSUES THAT THEY SEE EYE TO EYE,
WHETHER THAN STABILITY IN
AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ, ISIS, AND
ENERGY SECURITY.
THERE'S LOTS AT STATE HERE AND A
LOT ON THE TABLE THEY CAN STILL
DISCUSS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
ISSUES INSIDE IRANIAN SOCIETY
THAT WE AS AMERICANS WOULD STILL
HAVE SERIOUS PROBLEMS WITH?
>> I MEAN, IT DEPENDS ON WHICH
ONES.
OBVIOUSLY, IN MY OPINION, THE
ISOLATION OF IRAN DID NOT HELP
THE HUMAN RIGHTS CONDITIONS OF
IRANIANS WITHIN THE COUNTRY.
THROUGH ENGAGEMENT, THROUGH
DIPLOMACY, AND THROUGH OPENING
OF IRAN AND ENGAGING WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY, WE WILL
SEE ALSO WITHIN THE COUNTRY
MORE SPACE FOR LIBERTIES, FOR
HUMAN RIGHTS CONDITIONS
IMPROVING; AND WHEN WE CLOSE OFF
A COUNTRY, THIS BECOMES MUCH
MORE DIFFICULT TO PRESS A
COUNTRY TO EVOLVE OR CHANGE ITS
CONDITION ON SUCH MATTERS AS YOU
MENTIONED IN THE COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, EMAD
KIYAEI, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE, THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR PEOPLE WHO
CANNOT AFFORD FINES, COURT FEES
OR BAIL MONEY, EVEN SMALL
BRUSHES WITH THE LAW CAN LEAD TO
AN ARREST AND JAIL TIME.
HERE IN AMERICA'S MOST POPULOUS
CITY, NEW YORK, THE POLICE ISSUE
HUNDREDS OF SUMMONSES FOR LOW-
LEVEL OFFENSES EVERY DAY, BUT
FOLKS WHO DON'T APPEAR IN COURT
WHEN THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO OR PAY
THE REQUIRED FINE CAN FIND
THEMSELVES ON THE RECEIVING END
OF AN ARREST WARRANT, WHICH CAN
SHOW UP ON A BACKGROUND CHECK
WHEN APPLYING FOR A JOB OR A
PLACE TO LIVE.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTS ON AN EFFORT LED BY A
PROSECUTOR TO REDUCE OUTSTANDING
WARRANTS FOR LOW-LEVEL CRIMES.
>> Reporter: ON A SATURDAY
MORNING IN DECEMBER, A CROWD
WAITS OUTSIDE THE MOUNT LEBANON
BAPTIST CHURCH IN BROOKLYN, NEW
YORK.
HUNDREDS MORE PACK THE SANCTUARY
INSIDE.
THEY'RE SEEKING FORGIVENESS, NOT
FROM A HIGHER POWER BUT FROM NEW
YORK CITY'S CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM.
THE EVENT IS CALLED "BEGIN
AGAIN."
THE PURPOSE: TO CLEAR ARREST
WARRANTS STEMMING FROM LOW-LEVEL
CRIMES.
>> I'M HERE TO CLEAR UP A PAST
WARRANT THAT I HAD FOR
TRESPASSING.
>> THERE'S NOTHING WORSE THAN
WALKING AROUND IN THE CITY AND
HAVING A CLOUD HANGING OVER YOUR
HEAD.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
STATE, NEW YORK CITY HAS
1.4 MILLION OPEN ARREST WARRANTS
DATING BACK TO THE 1980s;
NOT FOR SERIOUS OR VIOLENT
CRIMES, BUT FOR SO-CALLED
"QUALITY OF LIFE" OFFENSES--
THINGS LIKE PUBLIC URINATION,
LOITERING, BEING IN A PARK AFTER
CLOSING OR WALKING A DOG WITHOUT
A LEASH.
BROOKLYN DISTRICT ATTORNEY
KENNETH THOMPSON-- NO RELATION
TO THIS REPORTER-- STARTED
"BEGIN AGAIN" LAST YEAR TO
REDUCE THE PUBLIC'S DISTRUST AND
FEAR OF LAW ENFORCEMENT, AND TO
EASE THE PUNITIVE BURDEN THESE
WARRANTS CAN HAVE.
>> WARRANTS NEVER GO AWAY, SO,
WHEN PEOPLE APPLY FOR JOBS, THEY
COME UP IN BACKGROUND CHECKS.
IT COULD AFFECT SOMEONE'S
APPLICATION FOR CITIZENSHIP.
ABILITY TO GET HOUSING.
SO, THERE ARE REAL CONSEQUENCES
TO OUTSTANDING WARRANTS.
WE NEED TO DEAL WITH THIS
CRISIS, THIS STAGGERING NUMBER
OF OUTSTANDING SUMMONS WARRANTS.
WE HAVE TO DEAL WITH THAT NOW.
>> Reporter: BETWEEN 2003 AND
2013, NEW YORK CITY POLICE
ISSUED MORE THAN SIX MILLION
SUMMONSES FOR LOW-LEVEL CRIMES
IN A CITY OF ABOUT 8.4 MILLION
PEOPLE.
WHEN A SUMMONS IS ISSUED, A
PERSON MUST APPEAR IN COURT ON A
SPECIFIC DAY AND TIME, AND
USUALLY ENDS UP PAYING A FINE
RANGING FROM $25 TO $250.
BUT NEARLY 40% OF PEOPLE ISSUED
A SUMMONS FAIL TO APPEAR IN
COURT, RESULTING IN A JUDGE
AUTOMATICALLY ISSUING AN ARREST
WARRANT.
THOMPSON SAYS THAT DOESN'T MAKE
SENSE FOR LOW-LEVEL CRIMES.
>> ONCE A BENCH WARRANT IS
ISSUED FOR SOMEONE'S ARREST,
THAT POLICE OFFICER WHO COMES
INTO CONTACT WITH THE PERSON WHO
HAS THE WARRANT HAS NO
DISCRETION.
THAT OFFICER MUST ARREST THAT
PERSON AND PUT THEM THROUGH THE
SYSTEM.
THE PERSON WHO'S STOPPED MAY
RESIST ARREST OR FLEE BECAUSE OF
THAT OUTSTANDING WARRANT, AND,
SO, WE ARE UNNECESSARILY PUTTING
OUR POLICE OFFICERS IN PERIL.
>> Reporter: 27-YEAR-OLD MALCOLM
RICHARDS CAME TO "BEGIN AGAIN"
TO CLEAR A WARRANT FOR AN UNPAID
OPEN CONTAINER SUMMONS HE
RECEIVED FOR DRINKING A BEER IN
A PARK.
>> I DON'T WANT TO CALL MY JOB
AND TELL THEM I'M IN JAIL FOR
FOR THIS.
>> Reporter: THE FIRST STOP: THE
CHURCH BASEMENT, FILLED WITH
ATTORNEYS AND PARALEGALS FROM
THE LEGAL AID SOCIETY.
>> IT MIGHT HAVE BEEN FROM,
LIKE, A 1989 CASE.
>> Reporter: IN A MAKESHIFT
COURTROOM IN THE CHURCH ATTIC,
A JUDGE HEARS FROM THE
PROSECUTORS AND DEFENDANTS'
ATTORNEYS.
IN JUST A FEW MINUTES,
DEFENDANTS LIKE RICHARDS MAY
LEARN WHETHER THEIR WARRANTS ARE
CLEARED.
PROGRAMS LIKE "BEGIN AGAIN" HAVE
SPRUNG UP IN RECENT YEARS ACROSS
THE U.S., FROM TULSA TO ST.
LOUIS TO ATLANTA, CLEARING TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF WARRANTS AND
HELPING EASE THE BURDEN ON THE
COURTS.
IN NEW YORK, CRITICS SAY THE
SUMMONSES THAT LEAD TO WARRANTS
DISPROPORTIONATELY AFFECT POOR
AND MINORITY COMMUNITIES, WHICH
ARE OFTEN ALSO THE MOST HEAVILY
POLICED.
A NEW YORK CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
ANALYSIS FOUND MORE THAN 80% OF
SUMMONSES WENT TO BLACKS AND
HISPANICS.
MALCOLM RICHARDS GREW UP IN
BROWNSVILLE, ONE OF BROOKLYN'S
POOREST NEIGHBORHOODS.
HE GOT HIS FIRST SUMMONS AT 16,
WHEN, HE SAYS, HE WAS UNLOCKING
HIS BICYCLE ONE EVENING AFTER
LEAVING AN AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM.
>> I GOT ON MY BIKE AND A COP
CAME OUT OF NOWHERE, AND HE WAS
LIKE, "HEY, YOU CAN'T BE IN HERE
AFTER DARK."
>> Reporter: THE OFFICER ISSUED
HIM A SUMMONS THAT CARRIED A
FINE.
>> MY MOM IS A SINGLE MOM, SO
SHE CAN'T REALLY JUST SAY, "HEY,
HERE'S MONEY, GO PAY IT."
SO, I DIDN'T HAVE THE MONEY TO
GO PAY THE TICKET, SO THAT'S WHY
IT TURNED INTO A WARRANT.
AND THEN I FORGOT ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: THREE YEARS LATER,
RICHARDS SNUCK HIS BROTHER
THROUGH A SUBWAY TURNSTILE WITH
HIM, WITHOUT PAYING A FARE.
AN OFFICER CAUGHT THEM AND RAN
RICHARDS' NAME THROUGH A POLICE
DATABASE.
>> THE NEXT THING YOU KNOW, A
COP CAR PULLED UP, AND HE WAS
LIKE, "HEY, YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO GO DOWN WITH US."
AND I WAS LIKE, "WHAT FOR?"
AND HE SAID, "YOU HAVE A WARRANT
FOR YOUR ARREST."
MY BROTHER WAS CRYING OUTSIDE
THE POLICE CAR WHILE I'M SITTING
BEHIND THERE.
I'M CRYING, TOO.
>> Reporter: RICHARDS SPENT 24
HOURS IN JAIL.
>> THE EXPERIENCE WAS HORRIBLE.
I WOULD NEVER WANT TO GO THROUGH
IT AGAIN.
>> Reporter: BUT IT DID ALMOST
HAPPEN AGAIN.
IN 2014, A POLICE OFFICER ISSUED
HIM THAT OPEN CONTAINER SUMMONS.
RICHARDS SAYS HE WAS UNEMPLOYED
AT THE TIME AND COULDN'T AFFORD
THE $25 FINE.
YOU DID KNOW, THOUGH, THAT YOU
WERE BREAKING THE LAW BY
DRINKING IN A PARK, RIGHT?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH YOU'D
HAD THIS PRETTY TERRIBLE
EXPERIENCE WHEN YOU WERE 19,
BEING PUT INTO CENTRAL BOOKING
FOR 24 HOURS, YOU STILL DIDN'T
TAKE CARE OF THE TICKET THIS
TIME AROUND.
>> NO.
>> Reporter: DID YOU CONSIDER
GOING DOWN AND JUST EXPLAINING
TO THE COURT, "HEY, I CAN'T PAY
RIGHT NOW?"
>> I THOUGHT ABOUT IT, BUT I'M
LIKE, IF I DO THAT, I FEEL LIKE
I'M GOING TO GET BOOKED.
>> Reporter: POLICE REFORM
ADVOCATES ALLEGE THE LARGE
NUMBER OF OPEN ARREST WARRANTS
MAY STEM IN PART FROM QUOTAS FOR
SUMMONSES, TICKETS AND ARRESTS.
SUCH QUOTAS ARE ILLEGAL IN NEW
YORK STATE, BUT SOME NEW YORK
CITY POLICE OFFICERS SAY THEY
STILL EXIST.
>> AT THE END OF THE DAY, IT'S
QUOTA, NUMBERS, QUOTA.
>> Reporter: ADHYL POLANCO, IN
HIS 11th YEAR ON THE FORCE, IS
ONE OF A DOZEN OFFICERS WHO HAVE
FILED A LAWSUIT ALLEGING THE
N.Y.P.D. USES A QUOTA SYSTEM FOR
ARRESTS AND SUMMONSES.
THE LAWSUIT ALLEGES OFFICERS
HAVE BEEN SUBJECTED FOR YEARS TO
QUOTAS SUCH AS "20 AND 1"--
MEANING 20 SUMMONSES AND ONE
ARREST PER MONTH.
POLANCO SAYS THE PRESSURE TO
PRODUCE THEM HAS EASED SINCE
MAYOR BILL DE BLASIO TOOK OFFICE
TWO YEARS AGO AND APPOINTED BILL
BRATTON AS COMMISSIONER, BUT
POLANCO STILL FEELS JUDGED ON
THE NUMBERS AND LITTLE ELSE.
>> YOU CANNOT SAY THAT YOU RAN
TO THE HOSPITAL WITH A KID THAT
WAS NOT BREATHING, AND... AND
THAT YOU SEPARATED A FIGHT HERE
AND YOU HELPED THIS PERSON
THERE.
THAT DOESN'T CUT IT.
THEY NEED SUMMONSES.
THEY NEED ARRESTS.
>> Reporter: CITY ATTORNEYS HAVE
FILED A MOTION TO DISMISS THE
SUIT BECAUSE THEY SAY IT IS
"DEVOID OF FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS."
>> THERE'S NO QUOTA SYSTEM IN
THE N.Y.P.D.
IS THERE AN EXPECTATION, AS A
NEW YORK CITY POLICE OFFICER,
THAT YOU TAKE SUMMARY ACTION
WHEN YOU NEED TO?
ABSOLUTELY.
>> Reporter: JAMES O'NEILL IS
THE N.Y.P.D.'S CHIEF OF
DEPARTMENT, THE HIGHEST RANKING
UNIFORMED POSITION UNDER
COMMISSIONER BRATTON.
HE POINTS OUT THE NUMBER OF
CITYWIDE SUMMONSES HAS DECLINED.
BETWEEN 2013 AND 2014, THEY
DROPPED FROM 439,000 TO 369,000,
OR ABOUT 16%.
SUMMONSES DECLINED ANOTHER 17.5%
LAST YEAR.
O'NEILL SAYS THAT'S BECAUSE THE
DEPARTMENT NOW EMPHASIZES
OFFICERS USING MORE DISCRETION.
>> IT'S NOT ABOUT QUANTITY, IT'S
ABOUT QUALITY.
WE WERE FOR MANY YEARS A
NUMBERS-DRIVEN ORGANIZATION.
WE STILL HAVE TO BE DRIVEN BY
SOME NUMBERS, AND THOSE ARE THE
CRIME NUMBERS.
SO, IF WE'RE OUT THERE LOCKING
UP PEOPLE NOT INVOLVED, OR
GIVING SUMMONSES TO PEOPLE NOT
INVOLVED, THAT DOES CAUSE
RESENTMENT.
>> Reporter: O'NEILL SAYS THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IS TALKING
WITH CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS ABOUT
POSSIBLY DECRIMINALIZING SOME
LOW-LEVEL OFFENSES, BUT HE SAYS
THE ABILITY TO ISSUE A SUMMONS
FOR QUALITY OF LIFE VIOLATIONS
IS STILL AN IMPORTANT TOOL.
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
HAVE THE OPTION.
SOMETIMES WHEN YOU'RE DEALING
WITH A SITUATION, YOU NEED TO
HAVE THAT TOOL AVAILABLE TO MAKE
SURE THAT PEOPLE UNDERSTAND THAT
IF THIS BEHAVIOR DOES NOT GET
BETTER, IF IT'S NOT CORRECTED,
THAT YOU COULD END UP IN
CRIMINAL COURT WITH A SUMMONS OR
EVEN POSSIBLY ARREST THEM.
>> Reporter: BROOKLYN DISTRICT
ATTORNEY KENNETH THOMPSON SAYS
HE'S NOT FOCUSING ON N.Y.P.D.
TACTICS, BUT WHY MORE THAN A
MILLION SUMMONSES HAVE LAPSED
INTO WARRANTS.
>> SO, IF YOU HAVE A CHILDCARE
ISSUE-- LET'S SAY ONE OF YOUR
CHILDREN IS SICK, OR YOU CAN'T
TAKE OFF FROM WORK BECAUSE
YOU'LL LOSE YOUR JOB, OR SOMEONE
IN YOUR FAMILY PASSED AWAY THE
NIGHT BEFORE-- IF YOU DON'T SHOW
UP FOR ANY REASON, A BENCH
WARRANT IS ISSUED FOR YOUR
ARREST.
AND I BELIEVE A WARRANT SHOULD
BE ISSUED FOR SOMEONE WHO
REFUSES TO COME TO COURT, NOT
SOMEONE WHO CAN'T COME TO COURT.
>> Reporter: REFORMS ARE ON THE
WAY.
THE CITY WILL SOON ALLOW PEOPLE
TO APPEAR ANY TIME A WEEK IN
ADVANCE OF THEIR SUMMONS COURT
APPEARANCE, AND KEEP SOME COURTS
OPEN UNTIL 8:00 P.M.
A REDESIGNED SUMMONS FORM WILL
HIGHLIGHT A PERSON'S ASSIGNED
COURT DATE AND TIME MORE
CLEARLY, AS WELL AS THE
CONSEQUENCES FOR NOT SHOWING UP.
THOMPSON WANTS ALL OF NEW YORK
CITY TO HOLD "BEGIN AGAIN"
EVENTS.
HE SAYS THEY HOLD PEOPLE
ACCOUNTABLE EVEN THOUGH MOST
FINES ARE FORGIVEN WHEN AN
ARREST WARRANT IS CLEARED.
>> IT'S NOT A BLANKET AMNESTY
PROGRAM.
YOU DON'T GO TO BED ONE NIGHT
WITH A WARRANT AND WAKE UP AND
THE WARRANT IS GONE.
YOU HAVE TO SHOW UP.
YOU HAVE TO GO BEFORE A JUDGE.
>> Reporter: SO FAR, THE
DISTRICT ATTORNEY HAS CLEARED
MORE THAN 1,600 WARRANTS.
MALCOLM RICHARDS' CASE WAS ONE
OF THEM.
>> BOTH OF THESE MATTERS ARE
DISMISSED AT THIS TIME.
YOUR TWO WARRANTS ARE VACATED.
GOOD LUCK TO YOU, SIR.
>> I FEEL GOOD THAT I DON'T HAVE
THESE WARRANTS OVER MY HEAD.
>> Reporter: RICHARDS IS
THANKFUL HE CAN MOVE FORWARD
WITH A CLEAN SLATE.
HE RECENTLY STARTED WORKING AT A
HOSPITAL DOING BUILDING
MAINTENANCE AND PLEDGES THAT IF
HE EVER GETS A SUMMONS AGAIN,
HE'LL TAKE CARE OF IT RIGHT
AWAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AMERICAN
TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES LIKE APPLE,
FACEBOOK AND GOOGLE ARE STRIVING
TO IMPROVE GENDER AND RACIAL
DIVERSITY IN THEIR WORKFORCE.
HAVING REVEALED THEIR STAFFS ARE
PREDOMINANTLY WHITE MEN, THE
COMPANIES ARE SPENDING FURIOUSLY
TO RECRUIT AND KEEP PEOPLE WHO
AREN'T.
LAST NIGHT ON THE NEWSHOUR, WE
REPORTED STEPS THAT STARTUP
COMPANIES IN CALIFORNIA'S
SILICON VALLEY ARE TAKING TO
DIVERSIFY.
TONIGHT, WE LOOK SPECIFICALLY AT
THE EFFORT INSIDE TECH GIANT
GOOGLE.
WHEN THE H.B.O. COMEDY "SILICON
VALLEY" POKED FUN AT A FICTIONAL
COMPANY MODELED ON GOOGLE...
>> THESE PROGRAMMERS-- THERE'S
ALWAYS A TALL, SKINNY, WHITE
GUY; SHORT SKINNY ASIAN GUY;
FAT GUY WITH A PONYTAIL; SOME
GUY WITH CRAZY FACIAL HAIR.
>> Sreenivasan: ...GOOGLE
EXECUTIVE BRIAN WELLE SAW AN
OPPORTUNITY.
>> SO, THIS IS THE WORLD'S VIEW
OF SILICON VALLEY, AND THERE IS
SOME TRUTH TO IT.
>> Sreenivasan: WELLE CONDUCTS
WHAT'S CALLED "UNCONSCIOUS BIAS
TRAINING" FOR TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF GOOGLE EMPLOYEES.
IT'S A KEY COMPONENT OF THE
COMPANY'S DIVERSITY STRATEGY.
>> SO, WHAT WE WANT TO DO IS
UNDERSTAND WHAT ROLE DO WE PLAY
IN MAKING THIS HAPPEN?
>> Sreenivasan: EVER SINCE THE
TECH GIANT PUBLICIZED ITS GENDER
AND ETHNIC MAKEUP IN 2014, IT
HAS BEEN UNDER PRESSURE TO ADD
MORE WOMEN AND MINORITIES TO ITS
WORKFORCE.
NANCY LEE IS VICE PRESIDENT OF
GOOGLE'S PEOPLE OPERATIONS.
>> WE WERE JUST TRYING TO
SHINE A LIGHT ON WHAT WAS GOING
ON IN OUR OWN COMPANY AND IN
THIS SECTOR BECAUSE WE REALLY
DID WANT TO CATALYZE THE
CONVERSATION AND HOLD OURSELVES
ACCOUNTABLE, BECAUSE ONCE WE
EXPOSED IT, WE CAN'T JUST GO
SILENT.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT AFTER
SPENDING ALMOST TWO YEARS AND
$265 MILLION ON THE EFFORT,
GOOGLE'S WORKFORCE LOOKS
VIRTUALLY THE SAME: 70% MEN AND
60% WHITE.
31% OF EMPLOYEES ARE ASIAN, BUT
ONLY 3% ARE LATINO AND ONLY 2%
ARE BLACK.
FOR A COMPANY WITH NEARLY 60,000
EMPLOYEES, CHANGE WILL PROBABLY
BE SUBTLE AND SLOW.
>> THERE'S NO SILVER BULLET
HERE.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO SEE THIS
MASSIVE SHIFT.
FRANKLY, IT'D PROBABLY LOOK
UNNATURAL FOR THAT TO HAPPEN.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE SMALL CHANGE
IS THE NUMBER OF WOMEN IN SENIOR
MANAGEMENT POSITIONS: 22%, UP 1%
SINCE 2014.
>> THAT IS A FUNCTION IN PART OF
THE FACT THAT THE PIPELINE
ITSELF, THE POOL OF TALENT WE'RE
DRAWING FROM AT EACH LEVEL, IS
GETTING INCREASINGLY MALE.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE WAY TO
ADDRESS THE PIPELINE PROBLEM IS
TO CHALLENGE STEREOTYPES OF
ENGINEERS, AND GOOGLE HAS TURNED
TO HOLLYWOOD FOR HELP.
MARIANA IS A LATINA TEENAGE
COMPUTER PROGRAMMER ON THE TV
DRAMA "THE FOSTERS"; AND
THERE'S LORETTA, THE SMART OLDER
SISTER ON THE ANIMATED DISNEY
JUNIOR SHOW "MILES OF
TOMORROWLAND."
>> MY PROGRAM CAN DETECT IF
ANYONE ELSE OUT THERE IS CODING
RIGHT NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOGLE HAS BEEN
ADVISING DISNEY-ABC TO DEVELOP
ENGINEERING CHARACTERS THAT
GIRLS CAN RELATE TO.
>> WE FOUND THAT IN FACT THE
PERCEPTION OF WHAT IT IS TO BE A
COMPUTER SCIENTIST IS A REALLY
IMPORTANT FACTOR.
>> Sreenivasan: ERICA BAKER
OVERCAME STEREOTYPES TO BECOME A
SOFTWARE ENGINEER AND WORKED AT
GOOGLE FOR NINE YEARS, BUT FELT
SHE DIDN'T FIT IN.
>> IT WAS REALLY INTERESTING
WHEN I GOT TO GOOGLE THAT PEOPLE
THOUGHT I WAS ONLY THERE BECAUSE
OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
IT WAS LIKE, "NOPE, I'M ACTUALLY
PRETTY GOOD AT MY JOB."
>> Sreenivasan: BAKER FELT
ANTAGONIZED BY MESSAGES POSTED
TO GOOGLE'S INTERNAL
COMMUNICATION SYSTEM LIKE:
>> "DIVERSITY ISN'T IMPORTANT."
PEOPLE WOULD SAY THAT AND MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, SHE LEFT THE
COMPANY LAST MAY.
>> I DECIDED THAT I DIDN'T WANT
TO BE A PART OF IT ANY MORE.
I WANTED TO GO TO A PLACE WHERE
I DIDN'T HAVE TO DEAL WITH
PEOPLE QUESTIONING MY ABILITIES
AND QUESTIONING WHETHER OR NOT I
SHOULD BE THERE BECAUSE OF MY
SKIN COLOR.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOGLE WOULDN'T
COMMENT ON HER COMPLAINT-- THE
COMPANY SAYS IT DOESN'T COMMENT
ON SPECIFIC EMPLOYEES-- BUT
GOOGLE DOES SAY IT'S TRYING TO
CREATE A MORE INCLUSIVE CULTURE,
PRODUCING VIDEOS...
>> WHAT WOULD THE WORLD LOOK
LIKE IF EVERYBODY WERE AWARE OF
THE STEREOTYPES THAT THEY HAVE?
>> Sreenivasan: ...AND OFFERING
"BIAS BUSTING WORKSHOPS" LIKE
THIS ONE WHERE EMPLOYEES ROLE
PLAY.
>> I'M SORRY, DO YOU KNOW WHEN
THEY'RE GOING TO BE RESTOCKING
THE DIET COKE IN THE FRIDGE?
>> NO, I DON'T, BUT I WAS
WONDERING THE SAME THING.
>> Sreenivasan: A SIMILAR
SCENARIO ONCE HAPPENED TO HER.
>> I WAS IN AN OFFICE WHERE THEY
HAVE A BARISTA BAR, AND SOMEONE
WAS LIKE, "OH, CAN YOU MAKE ME,
LIKE, A CAPPUCCINO OR SOMETHING
LIKE THAT?"
>> Sreenivasan: JASON BUBEREL,
WHO RUNS SOME OF THESE
WORKSHOPS, HOPES THEY WILL
ENCOURAGE UNDERREPRESENTED
ENGINEERS TO STAY WITH THE
COMPANY.
>> WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO SEE OVER
TIME OCCUR HERE AT GOOGLE IS TO
SEE THE ATTRITION RATE OF WOMEN
MINORITIES IN ENGINEERING ROLES
DECREASE OVER TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: NANCY LEE SAYS
GOOGLE IS IN IT FOR THE LONG
HAUL.
>> TO SEE SOMETHING SIGNIFICANT
WHERE WE'RE ACTUALLY HITTING A
MARKET SUPPLY OF 10% OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT OF HISPANIC
AND BLACK GOOGLERS, THAT'S GOING
TO TAKE SEVERAL YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN MORE ABOUT
HOW OTHER SILICON VALLEY
COMPANIES ARE TRYING TO IMPROVE
THEIR DIVERSITY.
WATCH MY REPORT AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A TERRORIST
ATTACK ON A HOTEL IN AFRICA BY
ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS LINKED TO AL
QAEDA HAS CLAIMED TWO DOZEN
LIVES.
THE ATTACK HAPPENED LAST NIGHT
IN THE CAPITAL OF THE WEST
AFRICAN NATION OF BURKINA FASO,
WHICH LIES BETWEEN GHANA AND
MALI.
THE TARGET, THE SPLENDID HOTEL,
IS A LUXURY HOTEL POPULAR WITH
VISITORS FROM WESTERN COUNTRIES.
AT LEAST FOUR ATTACKERS ARMED
WITH GUNS STORMED THE HOTEL
AND A NEARBY RESTAURANT AND
BEGAN SHOOTING.
TODAY, GOVERNMENT TROOPS-- WITH
THE HELP OF FRENCH TROOPS AND
U.S. ADVISORS-- RETOOK THE HOTEL
AND FREED ABOUT 150 PEOPLE AFTER
A GUN BATTLE WITH THE
TERRORISTS.
OFFICIALS SAY AT LEAST 23 HOTEL
AND CAFE GUESTS WERE KILLED AND
THEY WERE FROM 18 COUNTRIES, BUT
IT'S NOT KNOWN IF ANY WERE
AMERICANS.
SECURITY FORCES KILLED THE FOUR
ATTACKERS.
AL QAEDA IN THE ISLAMIC MAGHREB
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
ATTACK.
THAT'S THE SAME GROUP THAT
CARRIED OUT AN ATTACK ON A HOTEL
IN MALI TWO MONTHS AGO.
TAIWAN HAS ELECTED ITS FIRST
FEMALE PRESIDENT.
WITH 56% OF THE VOTE, TSAI ING-
WEN WILL LEAD THE SELF-GOVERNING
ISLAND.
THE 59-YEAR-OLD FAVORS
INDEPENDENCE FOR TAIWAN BUT
PROMISED "CONSISTENT,
PREDICTABLE AND SUSTAINABLE"
RELATIONS WITH MAINLAND CHINA.
IN RESPONSE TO HER VICTORY,
CHINA SAID IT WILL NOT TOLERATE
PRO-INDEPENDENCE ACTIVITIES IN
TAIWAN, AN ISLAND OF 23 MILLION,
AND REITERATED ITS VIEW THAT
CHINA AND TAIWAN ARE ONE NATION
TO BE UNIFIED EVENTUALLY.
THE U.S. CONGRATULATED TSAI ON
HER WIN AND SAID IT MAINTAINS
"PROFOUND INTEREST" IN
CONTINUING PEACE AND STABILITY
BETWEEN CHINA AND TAIWAN.
HIGH WAVES ARE HAMPERING THE
COAST GUARD AND NAVY SEARCH FOR
12 U.S. MARINES WHO WERE ON
BOARD TWO HELICOPTERS THAT
COLLIDED OFF HAWAII.
NOBODY HAS BEEN RESCUED FROM THE
WATER, AND DEBRIS FROM THE
HELICOPTERS STRETCHES FOR SEVEN
MILES FROM THE ISLAND OF OAHU.
THE MARINES WERE ON A ROUTINE
TRAINING MISSION WHEN THEIR
GIANT "SUPER STALLION"
HELICOPTERS COLLIDED THURSDAY
NIGHT.
NEITHER ISSUED A DISTRESS CALL,
BUT THE MARINES HAVE NOT SAID
WHAT CAUSED THE ACCIDENT.
>> Sreenivasan: RETURNING TO OUR
TOP STORY, THE INTERNATIONAL
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY CERTIFIED
IRAN HAS COMPLIED WITH LAST
YEAR'S DEAL TO DISMANTLE ITS
NUCLEAR INFRASTRUCTURE.
AS A RESULT, THE U.S. AND
EUROPEAN NATIONS IMMEDIATELY
LIFTED ECONOMIC SANCTIONS
AGAINST IRAN.
IN A RELATED DEVELOPMENT, IRAN
FREED FIVE AMERICAN PRISONERS,
INCLUDING A "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER, AND THE U.S. RELEASED
OR DROPPED CHARGES AGAINST 21
IRANIANS.
IN VIENNA, SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY SAID: "TODAY MARKS
THE FIRST DAY OF A SAFER WORLD,
ONE WE HOPE WILL REMAIN SAFER
FOR MANY YEARS TO COME."
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES WHO ALREADY OPPOSE
THE NUCLEAR DEAL CRITICIZED THE
PRISONER SWAP.
TED CRUZ CALLED THE EXCHANGE
"OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
PROPAGANDA" WHILE DONALD TRUMP
SAID IT "DOESN'T SOUND SO GOOD."
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.